I have a cup of
Good morning.
Well, welcome here. Health New Zealand.
I'm Sam Dale, chair of the health committee. You'll state.
Great. Uh, you'll see members around the table as well.
Uh, I'll give you a moment to introduce yourself,
and then, um, we'll kick it off.
I know members will have questions for you. Thank you.
Come back. Helen Stokes Lahar.
I am Helen Stokes Lahar, the
National Chief Clinical Medical
Officer for Health of New Zealand.
Um, I'll just leave it at that. Uh, Koto.
I'm Rachel Haggerty. I am the director of HSS funding,
so hospital specialist services funding for Health
New Zealand.
Excellent. Thank you. All right.
Um, I think I'll go straight to, I'll give you a couple
of minutes to, to say a few words
and then we'll go to member's questions.
Thank you. Yeah. Perfect. Thank you.
Um, we didn't, certainly didn't prepare lengthy opening
comments because we wanted
to know what was an interest to you.
Thank you. Perhaps just a few brief ones to pick up some
of the issues that we have been made aware
of informally, uh, about this process.
Um, I guess want to start
by saying there is absolutely no dispute
that organ donation is something that every employee
of Health New Zealand is fully supportive of.
Um, it's vital importance to the country and to our people,
but at the heart of all categoric donation
is absolute tragedy.
And, uh, the unexpected death of an
otherwise healthy person, it means
that there is a huge emotional toll on families, um,
and of course on the staff involved in the process.
Um, but organ donation is a core part of our business,
as usual as an organization.
And, uh, we're really proud of the achievements
of our clinicians and their collaborations.
Uh, despite the global decline in donation rates,
post pandemic, um,
there've been questions about ICU bed capacity,
but we've actually had a very positive uplift in I intensive
care beds in the recent years.
Um, and I want to be clear that ITU
or ICU bed capacity is not, um, a barrier
to undertaking deceased organ, organ, uh,
tissue and tissue donation.
Uh, the health landscape's obviously changed in recent years
since the formation of Health New Zealand.
Um, and as a delivery organization,
health New Zealand is focused on our improvement efforts are
all focused on set of strategic priorities, obviously set
by the ministry, um, and health targets.
Um, with respect to the NZ bar, so New Zealand blood
and organ service strategy is, they obviously the,
obviously delivery of the strategy, but we work
and collaborate very effectively with them. And who
Implements the strategy? Sorry,
The, the strategy sits
with New Zealand Blood and Organ Services.
Yes. Um, we are, we on the delivery arm, we, our role
is in consenting donors
and then separately undertaking transplantations,
two very separate exercises that have to be kept separate,
and we've got very constructive working relationships.
I know Sarah Morley well, she, and I've met like months ago.
I went out to visit the headquarters in Auckland,
which is a very positive,
and she meets with my Chief Medical officers.
Um, there's been questions about link funding for nurses
and obviously Rachel can expand,
but the money for Link nurses just absorbed into
our baseline organization.
And this is business as usual.
There's no question about ongoing funding of that.
It is BAU for Health New Zealand.
Uh, it would be great if even more
of our staff could be trained
to have the difficult conversations,
and that's something we can always come back to, but it's
because it's such hard work to do.
Well, my clinical background, I'm GP
and I know, uh, up close
and personal, the impact on families,
but actually the positive effect on families subsequently in
the grieving process to know that out to the worst tragedy,
something good has happened.
Um, I mentioned ITU bed capacity,
I can give you more detail on that if you want it,
but we, we are committed to raising this with our staff,
and I've used this as a lever
to open up some really good conversations
with my senior ICU colleagues.
Um, and there is continuous improvement,
ongoing and collaboration.
And I'm delighted with the recent signing of the MOU
with our colleagues in Australia about the
organ match process.
Not sure if that's come to your attention,
but that's a really positive example of
where we can give you better and well
for our people here and overseas.
So I'll probably stop there, but thank you.
Okay, thank you. Alright.
Um, we, we did hear some concerns
that the strategy hasn't been properly implemented.
Is there anyone given, do you guys try and hold blood
and organ, uh, accountable
or push them along in the, in the right direction
to make sure it is being implemented?
No, I wouldn't say never seen as our role to push. Yeah.
Uh, New Zealand blood
and organ, we have a collaborative working relationship
with 'em, but we are not, we don't manage them.
No. We are partners in trying to do a complex job. Well,
Is there a role for the ministry there to do that
as the sort of custodians of the health system?
The min Yeah. So the, the min the ministry are the people
who oversee and regulate what we do.
So I would assume they're regulate
and oversee all organizations that before to,
Yeah. So they're the monitor,
it's their job to, um,
provide the monitoring of that.
Um, and it's our job to deliver the service.
Um, so that's our responsibility.
And when the functions
that had traditionally been held in the Ministry
of Health were transferred to Health New Zealand when we
formed, which includes the funding for linked services.
So in my team, we hold all of those transition,
those contracts that transitioned over
and we fund into our hospitals, all of that, um,
commitment that was made at that time
When that transferred across.
Thanks, Hamish.
So as, as you're probably aware, this, this hearing is
as a result of, um, concerns raised over over the strategy,
um, I appreciate your saying that using New Zealand blood,
um, services, the main is the main, um,
hold of that strategy.
What role do, um,
does Health New Zealand play in in that strategy?
Um, and are, are you aware
of the different priorities within the
Strategy? We're certainly aware of six
priorities within the strategy,
and our role is very much on the end of when, uh,
potential donors, um, are in ours, in our hands, um,
opening up the sensitive conversations with their whanau,
um, and trying to do that well.
Um, and also enabling the conditions whereby transplantation
can proceed, so ensure
that the bed is protected in intensive care.
I, I was clear earlier
that whilst bed capacity is absolutely not a
barrier to donation mm-hmm.
Um, it can sometimes mean logistically if we really are at a
very tight bed situation nationally, that we slightly have
to defer planned use of intensive care beds.
So major surgery sometimes require a planned bed in ICU,
and so we sometimes have to defer that.
So there's some logistical work that we have to do.
Um, but that is our role. It is, uh, very much that.
And then once we've got the consent,
obviously then there's a separate team who can in
and do the organ harvesting, which is another about that.
So that's very much our role.
Obviously we are there to collaborate if there are
challenges and operational difficulties,
then from the operational side,
it's Rachel's team from the clinical side.
If there are questions, then we talk
to our clinical counterparts,
but that's where we see our role in all this. Yes.
So, so of course one
of the priorities is organ donation capacity.
Yes. So is from the answer, can we take
that actually there's no, um, capacity issue around,
uh, your part of the implementation, which is,
is retrieving the organs and transplanting them?
Yeah, for my conversations with my colleagues,
my clinical colleagues, they're very clear that the capacity
for the retrieval is not the issue.
Um, if, if anywhere that we could do better, it is trying
to consent more potential donations.
So that's probably the area where for me,
this process is encouraged us to open conversations.
What would it take to have more of those conversations
to consent more of the eligible pool?
Once we get to the conversation with families,
it's about 44%, I think it was last year, of families
consented for their loved ones organs to be used.
I mean, there's a question for me about the quality
of the conversations and the confidence,
but this is not a time for coercion
or persuasions is a time for ultimate sensitivity
and cultural understanding.
Um, so I think the training side is very good,
but probably having more people trained
that we can be sure they're always confident
and competent people around to have the conversations.
But actually no, the ITU and the retrieval
and the transplant capacity is not the issue.
If organ organs become available,
our surgeons make themselves available to ensure it happens.
A question just on, uh, I understand that people,
like I do on my license, I say I'm a donor.
Yeah. Um, but that information doesn't necessarily flow
through if I was to pass That's correct.
Is there a database
or should there be a national database around
who has consented to Yeah.
To have their organization? Because you're probably in some
quite time sensitive, um, situations too, right?
Where you need to keep the organ health thing.
So the reality is that actually, um, irrespective
of whether people's name is on the list, the, the, um,
driver's license registry, irrespective of that,
you start at the baseline of whether, whether there is yes
or no on their driving license.
You ask the family anyway.
So that's the baseline as a new immigrant to the country,
uh, I picked up my driver's license on day one
of my arrival here, had my lovely conversation.
I was actually delighted to be asked about organ
donation right there.
And then this works.
This seems pretty organized to me,
but of course not everybody holds a driver's license.
Um, there's a, you know,
many countries in the world have independent registries.
They have a merit, generally, they're costly to set up.
They have to be administered, I'm sure,
and and digitally linked.
And so digital enablement can be a limiting factor.
I think there are probably higher priorities right now,
but I'm not an expert in that.
It's certainly possible. No,
I could add to that one of the things that we are very,
um, committed to
and want to see more of in the health system
is end of life planning.
So end of life planning is a strategy that we see.
It's critically important
because it's the conversations families have
before these events happen that make it easier
to have the decision about donation.
Mm-hmm. So if we were to put our emphasis, um, any further
rather than a registry investment and,
and continuing training
and opportunities for families to engage with end
of life planning would have, um, a bigger impact.
We know that the end of life planning includes conversations
about organ good donation, and if you've agreed
before you get there, um, it's much easier conversation.
Cam, um, Thank you chair.
I've got a question about, um, I mean the strategy,
uh, you said six points.
I only could find five. Um, so Okay, sweet. That's cool.
Um, one of them is empowering intensive care staff
to discuss the donation.
Like is Health New Zealand actually got a, have you got any,
um, anything you can provide the committee to show
that you've, since 2017 Health New
Zealand's actually been doing this thing
So well, health New Zealand's existed, But my,
so I've been speaking to my intensive care colleagues,
like the heads of intensive care departments.
What this is this, because this is business as usual,
it is a normal part of what we talk about and what we do.
And so for every, you know, obviously the pool
of potential donors is very small compared to the number
of people who come through IT departments.
But it is a, it, it is a conversation
that they have in team
development, professional development.
I can't give you a bit of paper that says, um, this is,
this is our target for this week or this month or this year.
But it is something that is regarded as a quality activity.
It is, uh,
professionally actually very rewarding if you complete the
process of getting, uh, somebody through the donation, uh,
because it takes a lot.
So it is a discussed event, uh, type situation.
But beyond that comes, so
There's no, there's no sort of, uh,
training support for ic?
Oh, no, there is. Sorry. So we need to go through that.
So there's lots of, so if you think about the role
of clinical directors
and chief medical people running intensive care units,
this is part of their core,
should we say it's their core business
and business as usual, but they're extremely skilled at
understand this work.
They talk to their teams.
We have linked training for our nurses.
So we have nurses who are trained. I think we have 97 Yep.
97, 97 at the moment, who are trained in how
to have those conversations spread across the country.
And we continuously train people in the
importance of this conversation.
I think as clinical activities go,
clinicians are always looking for opportunities
to improve outcomes for patients.
Um, and the patients, the person in front
of you will have suffered a, a catastrophic event,
but the people that you can benefit are significant.
So people who are looking for donations for their patients,
such as renal specialists, liver specialists,
those people across the hospital,
they are conversing regularly around the opportunity
because we are also doing live donations. Yeah. I
Was gonna ask about the deceased donation,
but there's also a strategy, uh, strategy is to increase,
um, the ability for hospitals to deliver deceased.
Yep. Um, how's that, is there any paper,
the paper you could provide on that particular, um, think
what sort of capacity increase has there been? So
I think the important thing here,
and Helen is Helen's outlining, is we don't have a piece
of paper because it's a bit like if you asked us for a piece
of paper on how we run renal dialysis
services or other specialty
Services, well, it would be a piece of paper on how you've
increased the, uh,
We could give you renal Dialysis services.
We, we could give you evidence of how we've done that.
We could give you evidence of
how we've grown our intensive care unit,
inpatient bed capacity
that has been investment over a number of years,
particularly pro post COVID.
It was identified, um, that there was a need
for investment in intensive care
and that investment was given and that has occurred.
And we have more intensive care beds.
I think the really important thing
that we've discovered in preparing for this
and talking to our clinicians is they are very clear
that when an opportunity for donation arises, that
that is the number one priority for that hospital,
that intensive care and
that operating theater at that moment.
So it's sort of, it's like a process
that almost gives ups everything else
because we understand, firstly, it's really good
for the recipients, but it's also
really good for the health system.
Uh, a person who receives a, um, a positive transplant,
who has a good outcome,
costs the health system less in the long run
and takes a burden off other people.
Um, but there are more than intensive care doctors
involved in transplantations. I'll come to that. Okay.
Sorry, it's just a, a quicks on something that was,
earlier you talked about lack of planning, um,
for older years with this, um, organ donation.
Do you see an opportunity for maybe bundling
with something like EPOS and wills?
Or would there be problems around that?
Yeah, We have a life plan, end
of life planning strategy.
We have an end of life planning document
that has been in the health system,
particularly in the last, I think it's about eight years.
There has been a concerted strategy by the Health Quality
and Safety Committee to expand the role of that.
So it doesn't require enduring power of attorney,
but that it's informed by that.
So if someone develops the end of life plan,
and if you Google, you'll find it online.
I, I'm thinking just about the timing of it.
'cause what, what we've got as a responsive system.
Whereas what we want is a more assertive system. Right.
A proactive system. So if I can pick up one
of the challenges, and I think perhaps
what Rachel was referring to earlier is actually more
of a public conversation about have you had a conversation
with your family as opposed to more the written planning,
which we are doing a lot of work on?
Yeah. For most donors, the, the people most likely
to be effective donors are actually relatively well,
they have to be quite well and healthy.
They can't be disease ridden
'cause the organs are not suitable.
Um, it has to be a sudden death
for solid organ donation, not tissue donation.
I know that's not what we're here to talk about,
tissue donation, but eyes and velps and so on.
Um, but actually it's in a sense, it's,
it's the unfit people doing sporting activities.
It's the people who have a sudden catastrophic,
unexpected stroke when they're otherwise young un fitt.
And those are often not the people for whom end
of life planning is being considered in a formal sense.
So it's the talk to your family.
If something happened to you when you walk out here today,
what would you want to happen to your organs?
I know what I would want, but Yeah. Yeah.
I does that, does that help? Yeah.
About that? Yeah.
A bit of frustration in the sense that we had blood
and blood and organ service and, and, and now we've got you
and we, you're saying
that the strategy implementation is not your
responsibility at all?
No. Is that, that's Health New Zealand's position?
Well, our position is that we are here
to deliver on the strategy and that's what we do.
But we're not here to run the strategy
Is with blood and organ service.
Okay. How much you,
Part of the strategy was improved training?
We have kind of touched on that a little bit. Yeah.
Um, and in, in the original strategy document, um,
it sites some work done by ER
and young in 2016 that between 30
and 50% of, um,
intensive care physicians have had some sort of training.
Has that number changed?
Um, since, since the strategy was released?
I don't think we know the answer to that question. Yeah.
Um, we didn't know the question had been asked,
but we can provide that information.
I, and I'm certain it will have
Yeah, I mean, so, so we can't give you x percentage
of why percentage young dun
because we haven't asked that question.
What I do know is that since Health New Zealand is a single
entity as opposed to 20
distinct different health boards Yeah.
Um, that actually there is a much more unification
and standardization of approaches.
And so things like, like the link nurses who are trained
by NZ blood and organ,
but who are within our units, um, the,
these conversations do happen.
So I think you'll probably find awareness is
significantly higher.
But this culture of business
as usual organ donation is everybody's business in
that environment, uh, I would hope is highly pervasive.
Um, so it'd be interesting if the EXOS were repeated.
I'm not suggesting we spend the money to do it again.
Uh, but I can sort of give you my personal assurance that
by this process happening
and me asking some questions that we are raising the profile
and the having the conversation, which I think will
turn out to be a positive thing.
Um, but we will see. Mm-hmm.
I mean, do you suppose, sorry.
I suppose the ultimate aim is to have greater number Yes.
Of organ, organ trans transplantation.
So what measures are you putting in place
to ensure that happens?
Um, I appreciate there's been, you've mentioned a number
of things, but are we actually seeing that dial shift?
I think there's A couple of things.
The percentage of dinners has
gone up in the last year or so.
As we, we saw a 9% increase last year, 12% in,
in tissue increase.
I can't tell you whether that is a definite trend or not.
Um, but certainly post pandemic
because we have the dip, uh, the global effect, uh,
post pandemic where everything drop
and how much is natural recovery
and how much is due to activity.
We can't be sure. But sincerely hope that
as we are improving to be a more holistic organization,
that standardization will improve.
Personally, I'd like to see a greater proportion
of our nurses trained the link nurse route.
I think we, I think we feel that would be constructive thing
and we're hoping to explore that.
And as I said, I will be encouraging all the departments
to have a formal conversation about this,
which I think in turn will also help.
We're open to other suggestions.
We collaborate with NZ blood and organ, um,
and we're open to conversation with them about
what other things we could be doing.
Um, actually, yeah,
There are some interesting facts when,
when you look at the information that's been supplied to you
as well, where the number of families who say no.
Yeah. And that is probably the place
where there is the greatest opportunity
because there are families who've had the events,
how you get people to say yes.
Right. That is also about public promotion.
Um, that is about the strategy
that's being driven from the Ministry
of Health at the New Zealand Organ Blood Service.
It's not our responsibility to drive
that public conversation.
We do implement, um, end of life planning
and end of life planning is for everyone.
I have an end of life plan. I'm a perfectly fit,
healthy person, um, which says,
this is what I want to happen.
And my family know that those
conversations are really important.
Um, I think those are the conversations that need to be had
with the Ministry of Health and the New Zealand. I'll go
Limited On time. Yes. Yeah,
Just the operational questions.
Uh, we heard that the, the,
I think the family members can actually over,
over ruining the correct the wishes.
So under the system, what percentage
of registered organs donors actually go on
to donate their organs after death?
Yes. It's so, so of those who are asked
where the conversation starts in around 200 a year, um,
and of those who asked about 90 go on to the,
to be the next stage.
And actually once the process begins,
actually only 70 end up being eligible
because those, so that, those are the last years' figures.
So back 290, 70, those, there will have been 20
where the process was started.
And once we started to explore further,
we discovered additional disease
that we didn't know previously.
And we rented them ineligible.
But the, the gap is then from the approximately 600
that might have been eligible to, to start the process,
that 200 to 90.
So about 44% of those who, um, just are whether,
so basically there's that 56% gap
where the families are saying no 50 50
and understanding that is important.
That went, it takes a lot of cultural sensitivity. Our
Counter, Greg And I was just,
so one thing nobody's very
Short on time Has been just about, um, opt in.
Um, we have an opt-in system here to organ donation.
I come from a country which moved to opt, opt to opta.
Sorry, go ahead.
Just one question. Um, personal situation.
We've encountered, people often think that organ donation
and donating the body are the same thing,
are very different with organ donation.
You get the, you still get the body absolutely.
Back for burial or way
Very rapidly. Do you
find that that is actually
what actually often families think
that they're not gonna get a body if they
get an organization? See,
You start sometimes, one of the questions
that people do ask quite quickly
and understanding death rights
and rituals of different cultures,
different religions is vitally important part
of the process and the training.
So that ultimate sensitivity
and real cultural awareness is important.
But actually those things are quite easily
reassured and explained.
And, you know, all major religions,
all cultural groups don't, don't have opposition.
Sorry. I'll jump in there. Oh, sorry Jen.
Sorry. Just a quick stop on that.
Um, uh, in, in terms of, um, Molly for example,
very hesitant to donate organs
when they do often they ask when that recipient, um,
then passes away that that organ is removed
and sent back to the family to
Be buried with the Yeah.
How much is that, are you seeing of
that and what sort of percentage?
Well, interesting. Can I asked a lot of question
'cause I'd heard some myths about this sort
of marry reticence to donate
and actually the findings,
it's not actually true once you get
past the initial conversation.
So, uh, Maori families are just as likely as any other
to agree to donation.
I think those conversations happen.
I can't give the answer wasn't, that
Wasn't meaning that I was meaning I was asking the
return, the return
Of the, I don't have that data.
Actually, I haven't asked that question and
I don't think that is something
that we've seen or that we're aware of.
So I don't think, and that is something we would
jump, not be able to agree to
Doesn't To the initial
We're running over time.
So I'll just pull back, um, sorry.
There may be a couple more questions.
I'm sorry we didn't get to them. That's okay.
We're over top. Thank you.
Thank you very much for coming in today. Appreciate.
Thank you.
Sorry. Sorry. There's note back to private.
The petitions isn't good. You're taking out petitions.
See, good to see where they, yeah. Someone
From petitions committee keeps sending them over here.
Couple hospital passes, hospital passes
to the health committee, you know, mean
and then you read into the front row.
We're on. We're on. No, great. Well welcome Kathleen.
Very good to have you here. Um, firstly, uh, welcome.
Secondly, that is a wonderful oh,
way have plenty steamers jersey in the weekend.
Yes. And I hope I'll be there at domain.
Come on the, it'll just be Canterbury this week.
That's not the reason we're talking with you, Kathleen.
We've got you in here around, um, obstetrics specialists
for maternity services at WHA hospital.
Uh, we have you for 10 minutes. I'll open it up to you.
You may use that time as you wish.
If you want to give us, um, some time
for questions, you may.
But I'll hand that time to you now and welcome.
Um, and thank you for having me.
Um, I'm a bit out of my depth here
'cause I'm just, just a mum in the community over here
and I'm just someone that sort
of cares about what's happening in our local hospital.
And it kind of spiraled a little bit
because I've got a friend who, um, pushes me to
do things like start petitions and things.
So friend. Yeah, I know, right? We all need someone.
Um, so I, I guess I'm just here today to sort of, um,
to encourage you to take seriously the views
of these 5,000 odd people that signed the petition.
It's a really big number for a small community like, um,
Whakatane, and I think it really showed
how very important this matter is to our community.
As time has gone on since we first found out about
the maternity services being, um, downgraded.
Uh, we, we haven't sort of found that things have settled
or that things are getting better or anything like that.
We know that they're working behind the scenes
to get new obstetricians in.
But all of the, uh, the information that we're receiving is
that it's still gonna be next year
before any of that actually lands on
the ground here in Whakatane.
That we're still gonna be at the current status quo
here in Whakatane.
And the current status quo is not good enough.
We have mums being transported by ambulance, by air
to a hospital that is hours
and hours away from their home, from their families.
We have, um, babies put in danger
and we even lost a baby, baby Navy who died.
And that has a huge impact on our community
and we feel, we feel a great, I think a weight of grief for
what our moms are experiencing.
The other thing that goes, goes, that has come from this is
that as we go on, we, we have discovered
that the impact of this change in our hospital
is wider than just moms and babies.
We have, um, older women in our community going
through menopause and perimenopause
or other gynecological stages of their life who are unable
to access timely treatment for even, um, conditions
that impact on their lives in a very, very,
um, severe manner.
I know one woman who has been waiting for months
for an appointment who really desperately needs a
hysterectomy because she has a mass in her uterus
and she just can't even get on the list.
And that's, we are told by talking to the, um,
GY gynecologists and, um, the pe the specialists
that we are able to access.
We hear that that is because of the pressure
that is being put on our local system by the loss of those,
um, in, in, um, the maternity,
when the maternity system here.
So the, the flow on effects for our community have been just
devastating really, because we, um, it's
so many more people than we originally thought
who are being impacted.
And the worry is that the longer we go
to getting things sorted,
the more those timelines get pushed out
and the longer it's gonna take
to claw back the waiting lists and all of that.
So, um, I guess I'm here to say
that this is still very much, um, an issue that is present
and ongoing in our community.
It hasn't been resolved
and we really need to see things getting, um, pushed
to getting resolved.
Um, the second part of that is that, um,
I guess our petition
and the submission that I made is that we really want to see
a review done of what has happened
to get our hospital into this situation and, um,
and how to ensure that it doesn't happen again.
And we really, really want that to be, um,
that needs to be an external review.
I think the community has lost faith
because the communication
that has come from TU has been lacking in so many ways.
Um, it has been, um, that not timely communication.
They are very slow.
They didn't even announce this change
until it was just about to happen.
That's right. And uh, so I think
that if a review is done of
what has gone into the maternity gone on in the maternity
ring to cause this problem and, um,
and what needs to be done next time to stop that happening,
um, we, we really need to see that, I think done
by an external group to make sure
that the community can have faith in the recommendations
and, and in the review.
We also, we also, um, if, um, I think
because the situation that we have at the moment is not okay
and it's ongoing in its current, um, in, in our community
that things are not going well for us.
Um, we need some solutions to, um,
improve the services in the maternity
wing at Whakatane Hospital right now.
Thank you. Um, we have a few members with hands up.
I'll go with Ingrid first and then I see Johanna as
Well. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you Kathleen for your mahi
and just acknowledging to the families who have lost a baby
and those women who are waiting with some very concerning,
um, concerning symptoms, uh, both Hu Linda
and I were there at the rally
and we could feel the strength
of concern from the community.
So just wanna acknowledge that as well
and the community for rallying together.
Um, you have mentioned the poor communication
from Health New Zealand.
I'm wondering what responses you've had from the Minister
of Health and, uh, whether you, uh,
feel that this issue
and women's health in particular in Whakatane is being
taken seriously enough.
No, we haven't.
Um, to my knowledge, I don't think the minister has been,
um, to Whakatane to, um, visit the hospital to find it,
to talk to our community,
to find out anything about what's going on
on a personal level.
And I think that's, um, to us that reflects on,
reflects poorly because we, we feel as a,
a sort of semi-rural community, a regional community that,
um, that everything happens in the cities
and everything that that goes on, it matters
what happens in toga, but we don't matter.
And I think that's a really poor message
for our community to receive that. Do,
Do you think, thank you for that.
Do you think it would be helpful if he heard this,
if he did come down to see you?
Would that be a a, something
that would help the situation? Yeah,
Absolutely. I think that the community
would feel heard per perhaps,
perhaps, and, you know, hopefully he would hear us and um,
and actually push, push for us as well
because we really need some action here.
Kathleen. I can, I can liaise
with the minister's office on that as well.
And you know, as the member for Toga, um, I'm fairly close
to Whakatane, um,
and as well as as chair of the health committee.
Um, so we, we can, we can make sure that there is, um,
some insights going there
and we can, we can have further conversations with you.
Thank you. So, um, come back to you on that one.
Um, I saw HOA had her hand up. Hoa.
Yeah. Thanks. Bye Kathleen.
And thanks for bringing the continued concerns of the
and wa Western Plenty, um, whanau concerns
to the Health Select committee,
as we've heard very clearly from you
and others that the state of play has not changed.
Um, and your call for an external review of
what happened when we lost on mass, um, that group of
obstetrics specialists who walked, um, from the hospital
and then the subsequent what happened there, um,
is important to really examine operationally as well as
where decision making has laid.
Um, wondering about that there was,
we understand there was a head of hospital put in place, um,
and then some type of project manager to make a plan.
Um, since February, um, how have you understood, you know,
the progress of the work?
Or are those, um, heightened concerns still there?
Because we've heard, I've met with, um, baby Navy's mum
and others who are in the community, um, as midwives
and nurses and, um,
and they don't feel the necessary change is happening.
So I mean, I just think that that's a reflection of
how hugely complicated this issue is.
Um, what we now have in our hospital is an ED
that is falling apart.
Okay. So they are down seven
and a half full-time positions in ed
and, um, what we have heard from the doctors
in that group is that they trust the new general manager
whose name just escapes me right now,
but they do, they trust her.
They think she's doing a good job and everything,
but I do think that the, the actual
state in which our hospital has got to is so hugely, um,
well dysfunctional, I guess that,
that there's a long way to go.
Um, so yeah.
Quick up Mr. Chair, very quick. Thank you.
Can I just, um, I just want to tease that out a little.
Am I hearing from you that actually since that protest
because of what's happening at the ED department,
in your view, things are getting worse, not better?
Yeah, I think that's probably fair to say.
I mean, I understand
and I think the whole community understands,
there are some huge challenges in the health system in terms
of staffing and main and uh, keeping staff
and attracting staff, particularly with them over the ditch,
you know, offering such better conditions.
We understand that's challenging,
but it seems to be that the processes
for recruiting new staff are just so bureaucratic
and tied up in red tape and they all go through
or somewhere else not here.
So they get, they get,
everything gets in such a long lead time
before we actually see any improvement that it is, it is,
it's having a hear a terrible impact on our staffing levels
at our local hospital and our, the, the doctors
and the nurses and specialists at the hospital are all
overworked and, um, under stress.
It's just, um, this, the whole situation.
Yeah, it's getting worse and that is not
what we want to see in our community.
I think when we first heard about
the maternity services going, um, going, getting downgraded,
one of the biggest fears that I have heard time
and time again from people in our community is
that this is the first sign
that they're gonna downgrade our hospital permanently.
And every time we hear that staffing is down,
that services are being cut, it's, it's that same fear
and we have hundreds of people using a hospital daily.
Thanks Kat. We're we're over time.
Um, so I'm gonna have to, to cut it there,
but the good takeaways there around, um,
centralized decision making Yeah.
Local, regional folks and, and bureaucracies
and red tape getting in the way.
A number of other points mentioned as well.
Uh, thank you for coming
and speaking with the committee this morning
and representing your points in the Eastern Bay
Whakatane, so well, thank you.
Thank you. Thanks guys.
Thank you. Perfect. Please, thank you.
Pretty rough.
Excellent. We're on. Hey Mary, uh, welcome
to the health committee.
Uh, we're here to hear your petition on, um,
fluoride from fluoride free New Zealand
around stopping water fluoridation.
Um, the 10 minutes is there for you to speak as you wish.
If you want to save us time for questions, you may,
but I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Cool, thank you. Alright, good morning.
My name is Mary Byrne.
I'm national coordinator at Florida Free New Zealand
and an inaugural member.
I became passionate about this issue
because I learned that fluoridation was harming people
and advice from our Ministry
of health was largely based on historical belief rather than
reflecting the latest science.
I want New Zealanders to be as healthy as possible.
I want all children to have good teeth,
but also good brains, good bones,
and a well-functioning thyroid and immune system.
And I'm sure you do too.
You will have read our submission,
so I'll just touch on a few key issues as a reminder.
Uh, do we have PowerPoint mark? Yeah, I'll bring it up.
Um, I see the PowerPoint. Yep.
I'll bring it up. It's Coming up. I, oh, okay.
Um, okay. So what it says is,
no country in continental Europe flus their water.
Surely, um, only 4%
of the world's population is on fluoridated water.
Half of those are in the us.
If the US stops, less than 2% will be left fluoridated.
Last year, the US Government's National Toxicology Program
published their major systematic review
of fluoride IQ studies.
The NTP is the top US government agency that is tasked
with undertaking reviews of agents of concern.
Next slide. They found with moderate confidence
that higher estimated fluoride exposures
EEG 1.5 milligrams per liter in drinking water,
are consistently associated with lower IQ in children.
Who found that, sorry. The American
C National Toxicology Program.
Okay. Yeah. After their seven year review.
Uh, next slide please.
In response to criticisms at this finding only pertains
to levels of 1.5 milligrams per liter and higher.
The reviewers said several
of the highest quality studies showing lower IQ in children
were done in areas of Canada Fluoridated at
0.7 milligrams per liter.
But individual exposure shows widely varying total fluoride
exposure, many exceeding what would be expected
for drinking water at 1.5 milligrams per liter.
The Ministry of Health recommends 0.7
to one milligrams per liter.
Most councils FLUORIDATING 0.85,
which is higher than the US and Canada.
Next slide please. Their findings are exactly the same as
what was found with lead.
In fact, we now have more research
and of higher quality than what we had
with lead when lead was stopped being added to paint
and petrol in 1996.
According to an article by professors Nick Wilson
and John Horwick from the Department
of Public Health at Otago University in 2008,
it took two decades to achieve the removal
of lead from gasoline in this country.
They concluded there is a need
for a stronger precautionary approach
by policy makers when considering environmental pollutants.
Next slide please. Latest evidence, another review
by US government scientists finds neurological harm
below 1.5 milligrams per
and a US government funded primary study
of children in Los Angeles found fluoridation increases
rates of A-D-H-D-A study from Bangladesh
with lower fry levels than us found both prenatal
and childhood exposure were associated with lower iq.
Next slide please. As you know,
last year a US Federal Court judge ruled
plaintiffs have proven by preponderance of the evidence
that water fluoridation at the level
of 0.7 milligrams per liter presents an unreasonable risk
of injury to health or the environment.
Next slide please. The judge also noted that the EPAs
default margin of error requires a factor of 10
between the hazard level
and the exposure level due
to variability in human sensitivities,
even using 1.5 milligrams per liter.
This means the maximum level of water
not posing an unreasonable risk,
would be 0.17 milligrams per liter far
below the level used in fluoridation in this country.
The EPA is now filed to appeal,
but they're not questioning the findings of the science,
but rather the processes,
the American Chemical Institute is now joining the case
because it opens the door
for other environmental toxins to be challenged.
Since the ruling 64 US communities,
including the whole states of Texas
and Utah, comprising nearly 30 million
people have stopped for audation.
Uh, next slide please.
I think I might have missed one actually.
Uh, next slide again. Yeah, here we go.
Um, earlier this year,
the FANG District Council sought an junction not to have
to start fluoridation.
The application was denied with justice ground,
noting the US case saying that
although it concluded that water fluoridation at the level
applied in New Zealand posed an unreasonable risk of injury
to the health of the public in the United States,
it did not conclude that fluoridated water was
injurious to public health.
I don't really understand that statement
because I would think
that an unreasonable risk means the risk you're not meant
to take anyway.
You can look that up in the, in the court proceedings.
Um, the U-S-F-D-A announced in May
that it is starting the process to remove
concentrated ingestible fluoride prescription drug products
to children from the market.
The agency expressed concerns about mounting research,
showing harm to children from ingesting fluoride,
including studies showing
that fluoride alters the gut microbiome
and contributes to thyroid disorders, weight gain
and decreased iq.
We expect this to happen at the end of October.
We also expect advice from the CDC regarding fluoridation
all the latest evidence shows.
Um, can you go back one please?
All the latest evidence shows no
or very little benefit from fluoridation when cost
of infrastructure is taken into account,
they find no benefit.
Okay. Next slide. Thanks.
There are good public health dental programs.
Child Smile in Scotland is basically a school-based
toothbrushing scheme
that has seen a vast improvement in dental health,
including halving the number of general anesthetics needed
for severe dental decay.
The far north are about
to spend nearly $3 million on fluoridation infrastructure.
60% of the population is not on the town water supply,
so we're not reaching the people that need it.
Um, and last slide is just to say that targeted,
um, approaches.
Yeah, just I think, oh no, that might be
targeted approaches work.
They actually reach the people that do need help.
Um, it saves money in a multiple of ways.
One, by reducing general anesthetics.
Um, and then obviously infrastructure
and the cost of chemicals doesn't harm the environment.
It's not unpopular. We've found flu.
Introducing fluoridation in these
non fluoridated areas in New Zealand has been
hugely unpopular.
It's respectful of everybody
and most importantly, it doesn't harm anybody.
So, um, if you have any questions, I'm happy to, we've
Got a couple of minutes for questions. Jenny, mark.
Thank you, Mary. Look, I know this is a topic that, um,
hasn't got widespread support around the country,
so it's always a hard job when you, um, are on a campaign
to raise awareness and,
and push a, um, a particular, um, agenda that
is not totally popular.
So just acknowledging your dedication to this topic.
So yeah, you know, I know
that's been a tough journey for you.
Thanks. What I would say is, is my sort of feel
of the public is that probably most people just go along
because the Ministry of Health says it's good so
that that's what they think.
And then there's, and
that would probably be at least 50% of people.
And then there would be people who feel
that they do know more
because maybe they've heard the Ministry
of Health say 40% reduction.
Maybe they've heard about the chief science advisors report
that we've got, uh, information on in our submission,
and so they feel they know more.
But if we, but once you drill down, that sort
of falls apart then as the people who have strong feelings.
There's far more that have strong feelings against
fluoridation than for fluoridation.
And you find it much more in the non fluoridated areas than
a fluoridated place like Wellington. Thanks. Thank
You. Great.
Uh, do you know in Scotland, obviously I'm just reading
through tooth brushing teeth
is obviously important part of that.
Do they use fluoridated toothpaste?
Yeah. That whole child smile thing uses fluoride as,
you know, toothpaste
and, um, the dental things, you know, dental treatments,
they still use fluoride.
'cause fluoride works topically.
So nobody's arguing that fluoride doesn't work Topically.
Topically, Yeah. Uh, if when you apply it
to your teeth, that's, that's actually
what the science is saying, that's how it works.
Even the Ministry of Health will, will agree with that,
that it works from contact with your teeth.
It doesn't work from systemic originally.
That's what we all thought.
We thought that children needed to swallow fluoride
as their teeth were growing because it hardened their enamel
made it more resistant to decay.
But that theory has long gone.
Thank you. Right. Um, we're pretty much at time.
Okay. Mary, thank you very
much for coming in and presenting.
Okay. I'll just urge you to please take this issue further
and we can provide, um, experts from overseas
and everything if needed.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thanks.
We,
you are at menopause event.
Yes. Very informative. Very good event. Good morning, Dr.
Luke. Good to see you and to have you here. Good
Morning, Mr. Chairman
from Sunny.
How good is that Jealous? Yeah, no.
Well, we've got you here for,
for 20 minutes today, uh, Luke.
So thank you for making yourself available.
Um, we're talking about the briefing of Bro Smith,
which the committee's previously heard on
subject of menopause.
We resolved to invite the College of GPS in 20 minutes, so,
um, we'll allow you to make, um, short introductory remarks.
Couple of minutes and I'll open it up to questions.
Thank you. And I, I'm mostly here just to respond
to questions the committee will have.
Um, I wanted to acknowledge, uh, Rhonda's, um,
submission and, uh,
and the support she'd had through her petition as well
around the difficulties that a lot of, um, women have had
around the country over the last few years having
their symptoms recognized.
I also wanna acknowledge how, um, quickly the field
of menopause medicine has advanced
and altered over the last six years.
Um, I sent through some slides in the difference in
prescription numbers, uh, yesterday.
I think we probably have them in your pack.
And, uh, the estrogen numbers have, in terms of an amount
of estrogen, uh, dispensed
each year has risen from 90 3005 years ago.
Individual patient scripts picked up
to 470,000 in the last year.
So it's, it really has increased dramatically.
And in that time, of course, GPS have had to, uh,
reeducate around moving from a first do no harm model
into realizing that there was little harm
and that actually we needed to help women with a, um,
a catalog of symptoms and issues around menopause.
So the college's role, we train our registrars, we train,
um, gps as they come through.
They go through a formal education program,
examination program, and three years of in
practice experience where they will see multiple patients
including menopausal, um, women.
And then we credential and look after the ongoing education
and quality and standards of fellow gps.
And I know that, um, in Ms.
Smith's, um, presentation, she did point out that a lot
of gps are older and
therefore weren't taught this stuff at medical school
and then through their GP training
and it's stuff that they have to go
and seek course updates on.
So I have some figures on
what courses are on who's accessing those for you.
Thank you. Uh, members questions that I'd like to raise
You, you just me. Thank
you. Um, look, really appreciate it.
You mentioned older gps, so I recently when I, we sort
of hit the, the big M um,
my elderly GP basically said tough it out.
So how, how much of that kind
of attitude are we still getting across the country from
senior GE general practitioners?
Yeah, I, I would like to think a lot less.
I would like to think that the numbers are showing
that we're, we're getting a real shift.
Um, I'm, I'm afraid some of it may still exist.
I mean, the Health Pathways team have a
menopause and an MHT pathway.
It's a still, it's our, um, guidelines if you will,
are are signpost into guidelines.
They ran a webinar in March
and 871, um, doctors logged on and followed that
and their own pathways, um, sites.
The menopause one has had 21
and half thousand views by providers this year.
And the MHT one 31,000.
So people are seeking the information, information more
and more of it's available at conferences
and through our publications and guideline books.
And, and it's hopefully about getting those, um,
gps we've set views on it to, to upskill and,
and reorientate their views.
Can I just set from sub Mr. Chair? Thank you.
Um, so, so previously maybe, you know, some time ago,
um, if you were the daughter of a woman
who died from breast cancer as an example, um,
you were advised not
to take any hormone treatments when you hit menopause.
Yeah. Is that still the case?
Is that the still the, the advice that, um, gps are giving?
So yeah. So previously we knew that estrogen can be, um,
can feed if you like, breast cancers and,
and increased risk, higher estrogen exposure.
And we knew similarly that estrogen was prothrombotic.
So we thought it caused heart disease.
We know now it doesn't in heart disease
and is actually protective in terms
of breast cancer and family history.
It still is individual.
We still do a, a bigger dive into that family history.
So it's one of the cautions on the prescription
of hormone therapy is family history of breast cancer.
So we'd want to know how many family,
how many relations you had,
what monitoring you were having if you had
BRCA type gene follow up.
And so those patients tend
to get discussed in more detail with breast clinic.
Okay. It's not a flat no, but it's not a straightaway. Yes.
It's a, we need to look further into your individual risk.
He hence my tough it out.
Excellent. Thank you. Uh, Dr. Bradford.
Um, so I suppose one of the issues raised
by the petitioner was, um, uh, what
an appearance of the lack of education of gps from
what you are saying earlier in kind
of the numbers you've mentioned, um, accessing some
of the resources, uh, for gps.
Are you saying, just to put the question kind of to you
straight, do you think there's enough training for GPS
around menopause?
I think for our registrars now, absolutely
because it's in the curriculum managers assist.
Um, in terms of the older gps, see, the way GPS keep up
to date is we are required to do a minimum
of 50 hours a year of, um, continuous medical education.
And now that covers of course, whole of life
and whole of condition and is somewhat self-guided as to
what people are seeing and what we know that it is changing.
It's also self-funded, so gps pay
to go on courses themselves.
Um, what that means is that we as a college
and as profession can signal where there are updates
and encourage members to go and get those updates.
Uh, but they may similarly be putting their energies into
the changes in diabetes medicines
and heart failure medicines
and advances in melanoma treatments.
So I, the definitely the courses are available.
We've credentialed 22 of them.
There's 22 active ones, which we've endorsed for CME points.
And there are also all day Australasian, um,
menopause symposiums each year.
The last one was in Queenstown last year.
A number of people go to, what we see often is that doctors
who see a lot of menopause,
and there are some gps
who really do take special interest in this, um, tend
to lead in this and educate, but,
and perhaps we still have some laggards.
This kind of answered my question
because I was gonna ask about educate.
Okay,
Great. I'll
ask a questions.
Um, risk of being accused of being, um, male oriented,
but is there education of partners on this as part of your,
the gps, um, to help how they can assist
their partners through this?
Because my own experience is that, um, there wasn't,
um, and that it was very much the partner was left
to on the sidelines trying to work out
and it was actually nowhere to go to find out
what to expect.
Is that, do you see the college, you know,
how they can assist, uh, partners through these things,
which is I would thought quite important,
but is that part of the GPS role or is there anything Health
Promotion. Health
promotion, yeah, look, I think that, I think
that there, there really has been a transformational
understanding in exactly how complex
and, um, impactful the changes can be during menopause now.
And so the, the role would be if the partner came
to see the GP and said, I'm having real,
we're having real difficulties
at home and I don't understand.
And then there's that kind of conversation,
but I don't think there is as such a sort of
education course on it.
I'm sure there's something online.
Goa And then, and then Jenny.
Yeah, just building on that question.
Um, doctor wondering around the need for us to have, um,
a purposeful, you know, public health sort of, um,
social marketing, um, approach
to building awareness generally in community, um,
whanau community workplaces, um, and understanding,
and it goes probably with the aging well, um,
space I guess of education.
So it's not just on the GP side,
but it's across community health and um, that type of thing.
Do you think that we need to have more
of a focus on aging Well and, and in particular menopause?
I think, I think education to the public generally
around things to expect in health
and the life course is always really helpful.
I think we've gotta be aware that a lot
of this is being done for us by the tiktoks
and social medias of the world
and it's how we interact with those would,
um, is the most important.
But, uh, yeah, I, I do think
that there is probably still a lack of understanding of just
how impactful
and the range of symptoms
that can be included through menopause.
Just a up on that.
Yeah, just a quick one on the tiktoks
and the Instagram and education.
Get a have from there. Yeah, yeah.
Like, um, that misinformation
or disinformation that can be around,
'cause everyone's talking their truth
and, um, I their best lives in South care.
Um, but you know, like, uh, that's where I think that, um,
maybe, you know, in terms of, um, our public health funding
in that space that we could have the opportunity
to really influence in a positive way.
Yeah, because I've seen
them I know what you're talking about.
Yeah. Um, but how to also, um, educate
and inform in a positive way that, you know,
it's gonna come, it's gonna happen.
Um, and we can be and need help. Yeah.
We can be good kids and spouses Yeah. And everything Yeah.
Yeah. For societal change. So, yeah. No, thank you.
Yeah. My, thank you.
My sub Luke was just, um, looking at our healthcare system
as a responsive system
and building on the question from
my colleague Greg O'Connor.
Um, it seems to me there could be a role, really simple way
of changing that, which is that we have,
we know we have a suit of outreach on smoking cessation.
Mm-hmm. Why can't we have assertive outreach so
that if someone is going to a pharmacy, for example,
and picking up a prescription, so it could be the pharmacist
or it could be the doctor says, oh,
have you got family members?
Um, do they, do they need any information?
Has your college, um, looked at kind
of the more assertive roles that can be played, particularly
for, say, pharmacy who have had some of their roles reduced
through the big pharmacies coming in and taking over.
And so, um, that, you know, they've got time
and skills to provide
and that could solve things without having
to have a massive public health campaign.
It's just simple questions.
Yeah. No, I, I think that would be quite useful actually.
And, and pharmacists do give out huge amounts
of really useful information and support to patients and au
and yeah, as long as the patient is leading that supply
of information, um, to the family, obviously
it's fair health issue that they want to, they need
to be control of the information about.
But I think that could be helpful.
Thank my chair. Chair. Thank you chair.
Um, you know, clearly menopause is not a disease. Mm-hmm.
Um, and women for all
of time have gone through this process.
Uh, one of the questions that I've got is, um,
are you aware of any data which shows that women of today,
um, have worse symptoms
and wider range of symptoms than we had a hundred years ago?
Or, you know, in our grandmother's time,
is there any evidence that it's getting worse for women?
Or is it the lifestyle factors that women are working, um,
more and having to deal with symptoms at the same time
as working and run families and all that sort of stuff?
Uh, yeah. No, I don't think there's any,
there's no physiological reason for worsening.
It is around that lifestyle factor.
Um, working, running families,
and also I think probably diet.
Yeah. Yeah. There's, there's something that,
but also around, and the,
and the reason obviously low mood depression
and cognitive impairment or, or brain fog are involved.
And we run in a world where people sit at a high state
of anxiety, partly
'cause they're in their flight fight response more.
I also think that we've got a lot better, uh, advocacy
and, uh, being able to speak up, especially for women,
I think, uh, become much,
much stronger advocates in their own space, which is which,
and unfortunately previously medicine of course, was
entirely paternalistic, and we saw some of those
Impacts. Thank you for saying that.
It's true.
Yeah. Appreciate it.
Are there further questions? Sorry. Yeah.
Um, just picking up on what, um,
my colleague Ingrid was speaking to around, um,
pharmacists being empowered
and I think it's like, um, that interdisciplinary approach.
Mm-hmm. You know, in tobacco we've got the ABCs, you ask,
you offer a brief advice, then you refer.
Mm-hmm. Um, why is it that we are not taking
that broader approach of when you see someone,
and I'm not saying it's a female thing, either.
If you've got an older man in front of you,
he might have manaus, um,
and still, so, you know, like it's all hormonal.
A it's all a part of the process.
So, um, it jokes aside,
but I think, um, you know, like we,
how do we empower the workforce Yeah.
Different points of the life cycle
to be having this brief intervention approach
to really gauge where they're at
and then refer for the specialist care.
Yeah. Um, whether it's, um, the gp,
whether it's a nurse in the community
or a health promoter at a store somewhere at a festival, um,
or the pharmacy, um, that could be a better way
of utilizing our workforce
and empowering them to have these brief conversations
around their life stages and how whanau are presenting.
Yeah. I think it's, I think it's really useful
to have triggers for people to think about what they
need to go and discuss.
I think that a lot
of people would be quite affronted if they popped into the
pharmacy to pick up something someone said,
and you menopausal.
Shall we talk about that? I think so.
I think, I think we've gotta be careful and,
and also to, you know, when you do a menopause,
a proper perimenopausal, menopausal consult,
there's actually a pretty decent amount that goes into it.
And rather than a sort of quick, oh yeah, no, you want
to kill your husband and you sleep, here's some patches, he
Deserves it. Um,
Yeah. So
I think, uh, we, we don't want to,
and also there are, you know,
there's still are conversations to be had around
what is suitable, what types of MHT,
what's going on gyny wise.
And so it is a bit deeper than than that.
So I think yes, triggers and, and leaflets
and, Hey, are you having any of these symptoms type posters?
What? And you talk to someone who's good,
but I think the whole call,
you look like you're having a flush if you talk to someone,
shout might not be ideal.
Yeah. The aunties get quite offended when you say that.
Wow. There you go. That was experience. Excellent.
Uh, do we have any more further questions
or We, um, no, thank you Dr.
Luke for, for running us through this
and also submit a, uh, bro Smith is watching.
Um, thank you very much for your advocacy and the space
and the fantastic presentation here in Parliament, um,
a couple of months ago for bringing this to the committee.
Uh, we really appreciate everyone's involvement here
and the efforts to improve the outcomes
of women's health in New Zealand.
Thank you. Okay.
In private now. No, I
Morning everybody.
Very good to have you here. We've got you in here
for 20 minutes, um, on your report, uh,
on providing equitable access to planned care treatment, uh,
I'll allow you to kick off with a few introductory comments
and open it up to members for questions.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, Tina Koto, uh,
thanks very much for the opportunity to speak
with you today about our work.
Looking at, um, planned care. Uh, my name's Leanne Ney.
Uh, I'm the assistant auditor general
of sector performance at the OAG and performance audit's.
One of the functions that I lead. Um, with me today,
I have Karen Wong, who's the performance audit
manager, responsible for this work.
And of course, Richard Towers,
who is the principal performance auditor who led the work.
Um, we're gonna try
and keep the presentation brief
to allow maximum time of questions.
Uh, I'll just briefly introduce the work,
and then the team will cover key findings
and recommendations and some suggestions for
how the committee might want to take the work forward.
Uh, so the PI order Healthy Features Act, uh, 2022, um,
established Health New Zealand
and requires Health New Zealand to ensure that Maori
and other population groups have equitable access
to the health services they need.
We looked at how effectively Health New Zealand is
supporting more equitable access to planned care treatment
through the use of nationally consistent processes
to patient prioritization.
Essentially, we wanted to know
what Health New Zealand is doing to ensure the people
with similar health needs have similar access
to the treatment that they need.
We focused on planned care treatments,
so sometimes those are called elective arranged
or scheduled treatments.
They're an important part of the health system
and include things like operations to remove cataracts
or tonsils placed joints, hips, knees, ankles,
repair hernias, that kind of thing.
And there are hundreds of thousands
of planned care interventions performed each year
to support the health and wellbeing of New Zealanders.
We looked at things like the support
and guidance available to staff,
how Health New Zealand aligns supporting processes such
as those for booking patients and managing waiting lists.
Uh, we looked at monitoring and evaluation
of the variations in access to planned care
and what Action Health New Zealand takes
to fix any problems that they identify.
Richard will now talk a bit about
the key findings of our work.
Thank you, Lee. Uh,
new Zealanders do not have the same access
to planned care treatments.
A person's ability to access the treatments they need and
or acquire very significantly depending on where they live.
Uh, while people living in rural areas,
those experiencing social deprivation, Maori Pacific peoples
and disabled people are disproportionately waiting
longer for treatment.
Health. New Zealand is working
to introduce nation nationally consistent
thresholds for access to treatment.
Uh, the district's specific thresholds still in place are
obscuring the extent of unmet need for treatment.
In some districts, significant work could be required
to deal with the changes in demand
that could result from the introduction
of national consistent thresholds across specialties.
Uh, health New Zealand has been working
to improve the timeliness of treatment.
This includes ensuring that people are appropriately
prioritized for treatment
and receive treatment in priority order.
However, equity is not always a central consideration
of health New Zealand's efforts in this space.
There is a risk that some efforts designed
to provide more timely treatment
for New Zealanders like outsourcing could result in less
equitable access to treatment.
Health New Zealand has made considerable progress in
monitoring and reporting on
how well it is providing planned care across the country.
But there are significant gaps in the information it
collects, and including levels of unmet need for treatment
and the information about disabled
people's access to planned care.
Health New Zealand needs this information
to better understand and remove inequities and access.
And we made four recommendations focused on ensuring
that equity, equity, sorry, of access is central
to the wider improvements in providing treatment.
Uh, this includes preparing a plan
and with a clear timeline for the introduction
of nationally consistent thresholds for treatment.
Uh, ensure that it has clear actions to improve equity
of access to treatment, and that efforts
to improve timeliness, do not increase inequities,
strengthen its knowledge of equitable access to treatment
by filling gaps in information that collects
and improving the use of that information
and preparing a suite of planned care measures
to enable clear public reporting
about access to planned care. Over you, Karen.
Thank you, Richard. Um, our suggested next steps.
Um, we suggest that the committee should call Health
New Zealand in to understand
what progress it has made in supporting
more equitable access.
This includes what progress it's making on the introduction
of nationally consistent thresholds for access
to planned care treatment,
and how long this process is likely to take,
what actions it's taking to improve equity of access
for groups who disproportionately wait longer for care
and understanding the impact.
How is the system working for particular groups of people,
what it's doing to intro address information gaps,
like the lack of information about the access
that disabled people have to planned care treatment.
We intend to follow up with Health New Zealand in about 18
to 24 months time to understand how they've responded
to our recommendations.
Um, this concludes our presentation.
We are very happy to take questions.
I saw anger had her hand up and
Thank you Mr. Chair.
And I had a series of questions actually
to Health New Zealand, which perhaps would be better if they
came in and fronted up and we could ask them.
I guess just teasing out, um, the report, which did show
some real concerns
around unintended consequences from some of the actions taken.
Um, and I wondered if you, if I may, Mr.
Chair, just ask three or four questions that speak to that.
The first is, um, you have said that
the, um, planned care to,
to private providers could be increasing inequities.
How concerned about that are you,
and what steps would you expect Health New Zealand
to be taking to ensure
that they are not exacerbating those inequities?
Uh, as we've seen in the report, there is a risk there,
and I would say that is, it is an
understood risk health New Zealand.
So, uh, not everyone,
and not everybody is who was awaiting for treatment,
was, was on a waiting list.
It's a suitable candidate for outsourcing, um,
because of things like comorbidities.
Um, which, you know, means
that it's not suitable send to a private clinic.
They may need access to, um, facilities
that aren't offered in private clinics,
so they stay in the public system.
The scale of that issue is hard to determine.
Um, and that's why we want them to be monitoring
and managing that issue.
So if I hear you correctly, you're saying then the scale
of the risk is also difficult to ascertain
At the moment? Yes.
Right. That, that's helpful. Thank you.
My, my second question is around, um,
You scale of the risk, are you mean around, sorry,
the provision of private care is that Yeah.
Well we, we understand there's a risk in outsourcing
that people are left in that public system whilst,
uh, who are on a wait list. Wouldn't
It take pressure off the public system though?
Yes, and I think everybody agrees
that providing more access
To care should more equitable care, because
We discuss in the report is
because not everybody can be outsourced.
Um, uh, it means people remain in the public system.
And when it comes to those who have comorbidities
and can't be, um, sent to a private clinic,
that's not spread evenly across the, our population.
So Maori and Pacific in particular, they are known
to have more comorbidities.
So there's a a risk there.
And if it's not managed
and not monitored, then you get a a,
a population which is disproportionately Maori
and Pacific, who are still waiting
for care in the public system, most others.
So, but surely that you are kind of conflating to issues,
comorbidity and ethnicity, you kind
of linking them together, just looking at one.
So really the, if, if, even if comorbid was the fact
that you are looking at it, then of course,
and the more of those are gonna be in the public system
rather than actually that it's an eth ethnic
ethnicity kind of thing.
It's a confounding, confounding, uh,
factor in your analysis, surely.
Well, I would say that, uh, at the moment
what Health New Zealand understands is
that when you're looking at people with morbidities,
ethnicity as a factor where Maori
and Pacific overrepresented, what about people?
What, what we're saying is, you know,
what do you understand about
that and what are you doing about that?
Are there other, uh,
things you could be looking at like disability?
How does that affect the disability of disabled community?
And um, is the, is the age as well.
So understanding that
and understanding the risk more particularly is
what we want Health New Zealand to do.
'cause then they can manage that risk. So to make sure that
The people Who remain in the public system don't
continue to wait longer than they should.
Thank you Mr. Chair. And I think this discussion has
highlighted why we need to bring Health New Zealand in
because there's a, a, an issue that's been raised,
but then also there's an understanding
or response that you've just given us as evidence
that we don't even know the scale of that risk
because of the assumptions that have been made.
And so to tease that out with Health,
health New Zealand would be useful.
The second point to the second recommendation, um, is
around the fact that you've highlighted that the,
there is an aggregated data.
So there are these analyses done where, um,
confounding factors say, uh, rural location
and age and so on.
Other things that people have brought up are not being
looked at holistically.
Indeed. Again, um, can you just describe
or can you fathom the level of risk that that is,
uh, the picture that we are not seeing as a result of
that gap in the information analysis?
Or can you not Say that again
because you don't get that information. We
Don't have information. They're
not collecting the
information, we're doing the analysis.
So you're not collecting the information.
It's hard to do that with, jump over to Kim. You I
Did have more.
Just two more on the other two. I may thank you.
Equity is one of the main principles
of the planned care system.
Um, are you think that in this conversation I'm hearing, um,
everybody should be treated equitably by going into private,
um, and not sitting on public waiting lists.
Is that not, is the chair pointed out a good
for everybody if more treatment is happening private
and freeing up waiting lists?
Thank for the question. Good one.
Um, and this takes a bit of teasing out,
but when you have people waiting on a public,
public wait list and we went to, to like southern district
for example, they're having a real problem.
Problems getting people through that public wait list.
You can take pressure off that public wait list
by sending people private.
But then when it comes to the people
who remain in the public system,
because of the public system is often saturated, if you get
to these smaller districts finding gaps to see those people
who are routine patients.
So they're not a a, a high priority, um, in terms of,
you know, they're not urgent or semi-urgent.
They're a routine patient. They, they qualify
for treatment, but they're on a wait list.
They sit for a long time on that wait list.
You can get some of those people out
into the private sector.
So that's good for those people.
But for the people who can't go there, there's a risk
that they continue to sit on wait list
because there's no additional capacity
in that public system.
So it needs to be the plans around that.
So what do you do for those people? Mm.
So it's not whether you outsource
or not, it's when you're outsourcing,
people are left in the public system.
What plans do we have
for those people in the public system
still waiting on that list?
Who might continue to wait 'cause they can't be outsourced,
but but they would sit for a lesser period of time.
Yeah. 'cause you've taken a bunch of people off that
List. So how is there a more,
Well, if you say you take a group of routine patients
who are on a wait list, the rule is
that if you're a routine patient, you are treated in order
of how long you wait on the wait list.
So you are, you meet a threshold for treatment,
you're on a wait list, your class is routine,
so you wait longer than somebody
who's urgent or semi-urgent.
So you were on that wait list for six months.
Other people come in behind you on that wait list.
You should be treated before them,
but you're not a candidate for outsourcing, for example.
So they use outsourcing to treat the numbers of people on
that wait list to get
that wait list down, which is a good thing.
But if you are not a candidate for outsourcing,
even if you've been waiting for six months, you continue
to wait on the public system.
And there may not be an easy way
to see you are a gap in the treatment
'cause of the demand from urgent cases.
One cases come.
I understand. I I think what I'm trying
to question is like why are you saying
that's a failure of equity?
Like surely it's a, it's um, like what are you proposing?
Oh, sorry. That would be, that would be, um,
taking people off the public waiting list.
'cause the public system's in capable of fairly dealing
with it, giving it to the private.
Is that what you are trying
to choose people based on equity off the list?
Well, there's a, there's an equity, um, aspect here
because people with comorbidities,
the comorbidities aren't spread evenly across the situa
uh, across the population.
Sorry. So in terms of people who aren't candidates for, um,
outsourcing, it's not a clean slice of population
that reflects the population as a whole.
I understand that, but are you,
So, and just, just following up on,
on the pre previous question, um, and I think,
and I might might have gone paraphrasing this, this wrong,
but we, we can focus on equity so everybody's,
everybody's equal.
Um, and equity equity's a good thing, but,
and you're talking about consistent,
consistent standards across the board.
But we could actually to decrease those inequities,
we could actually just lower everybody
to the lowest common denominator then,
then everybody's equal.
But actually we have poorer health outcomes.
What what in your report is kind
of actually looking at actually lifting
rather than actually reducing to get equity?
Um, it's not for us to say that's right.
Whether that's the right or the wrong thing to do.
I think what we are saying and, and I think we
Always suppose to focus on equity.
Yeah. They're solely focusing on
is an issue for that matter. Well
Yeah, there are requirements in the
current act around that.
Yeah. So the principles rights, that's uh,
where we start, we started with the audit.
I think the conversation is sort of asking
if it's faster for everybody.
Isn't that just a good thing? And I think that
that's a fair point, right?
So, um, moving some of the volume out into, um,
the private sector may result in increases in speed
and that could benefit eventually everybody.
Um, it's not the same as equity though.
And I think that the point is similar people have similar
issues receive similar access to care.
So you can end up with a situation
where there can be improvements to um, speed
but also, um, exacerbate inequities.
You can end up with that situation.
All we are saying is there's a risk of that given
that Health New Zealand has these obligations according
to the act, they need to monitor the work that they do
to improve speed,
to make sure it doesn't exacerbate inequities.
And that might be in a different way.
And what we are saying is you need some specific work
to look at how you do that.
Okay. And you dunno how big the risk is
And people gain access to this private sector by paying
for private health insurance, right.
Uh, is elected
Mr. Chu, can I ask,
I'll go back to it. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, that was a great explanation
and I think, uh, one of the other areas
that you see is problematic.
And we see this a lot in the system
because particularly with, um, health targets,
you have mentioned that people waiting for diagnostic tests,
waiting for follow up review suspended patients
and those who have access first specialist treatment
yet awaiting treatment is a huge area of, uh,
an information void.
And yet that is certainly an area
where we could be thinking people have say access the in the
system, but we don't realize I've gotta wait a year
for treatment to get planned care.
Can you please tell me what your expectation is, uh, around
that from Health New Zealand?
And also just, um,
because I know we're short on time, the expectation about
how they would publish or make known the work
that they're doing to a show the risk
and b, what the mitigation is.
Thank you. Uh, so on that public reporting side,
we have asked for a suite of measures to reflect
for the New Zealand public
what your weight looks like from the time you basically go
to see a GP about a particular problem
or from your first specialist assessment.
Because at the moment there's not a clear picture.
So that's different than the health targets,
isn't it? It's going to give a bigger,
So the health targets can you give you, uh, a, a, a slice
of how long you will take through a part of the system.
Mm-hmm. But it won't tell you
how long your journey's gonna take from
go to woe essentially.
So we want a clearer sense for the public of to
partially able to inform them
and help them manage their own ex expectations about
how long it's gonna take them to get care.
Um, in terms of what that looks like, uh, I don't think we,
um, have a particular view on,
But, but the first part of the question
around the diagnostic wait times
and first specialist assessments
and so on, again, can you, um, hazard it a guess at how big
that risk is?
Or is it just impossible to tell
The risk of, Of of people having inequitable outcomes
through the lack of monitoring of diagnostic tests,
waiting up follow up reviews and so
On? No, we couldn't say from
the work we did.
Uh, what that looks like. Sorry.
Thank you. I'm wanting to unpack, um,
whether you could provide some examples in terms of rural,
um, health and our maybe secondary
hospital system, um, what you saw.
'cause we've heard about, um, you know, southern, um,
and south island, deep south, um, impact.
Um, is there anything that you're seeing in terms
of I think, um, Northland, I, Toro, Eastern Bay of Plenty.
Um, in terms of rurality
and access to planned care, do they have to all go to,
you know, a big tertiary hospital?
Um, what, what are you seeing on the ground in
terms of our regions?
Yeah. Um, because this a short, sharp piece
of work can't give you a, a broad s swath.
Um, so hard to say.
I think it frustratingly it depends on where you are. Yeah.
So the picture in Taranaki is gonna be different from the
picture in and, and deep south.
Um, we did when we, we did go to the Southern district
and spoke about the challenges of people
who are say on the lakes or living around the lakes
and having to travel into Dunedin.
Mm-hmm. Um, 'cause that's the hospital
that they office, the services they need.
Um, and you know, travel times of four to five hours,
I don't need to keep there and told, you know,
there's an acute case.
I'm sorry we've canceled you.
Um, and that happening multiple times to people.
Um, so anecdotally those are the kind
of struggles people are having and we understand from the
documents we saw that it's not uncommon in other
areas for that same thing.
So yeah, long trouble times, there's no certainty
that when you get there you will
actually receive a treatment.
Um, so those are the kind of challenges people are facing.
Yeah. Anecdotally I've heard that too.
Pretty good point. You suppose private
that means there's not the acute coming in.
Um, so what, what kicked off this, this report? No
Problem. It was in
our annual plan.
The, um, auto general former Auto General now, um,
had it in the annual plan for the year.
Excellent. Um, and when it comes to equity, um,
I appreciate that, that you were looking at ethnicity.
Equity across ethnicity
Is Probably the main focus. Lots of different types
Of Equity. Beg your pardon,
Lots of different types of equity focus on this report is,
is geographical as, as about where you live in
And I suppose it's kind of comparing apples with apples.
Like if, if someone needs a knee, knee replacement
and compare that to someone who's, uh,
needs a knee replacement and maybe diabetic
and maybe have a few other complications.
How, how do you, how, how do you separate that, um,
with an lens?
Good question. I think it's more
of a health New Zealand really.
Um, but I'd No, you go. We can continue.
Um, I'd say for the first point, the equity lens,
we took a a broad approach
and we do talk a lot about, um, uh, location.
Um, I think we start from
what information do they have about equity
and how are they analyzing
that information to understand equity?
And at the moment there are key loss, uh, lacks
of information around disability.
Um, and there's a lack of using information they have well
to do multifactor analysis.
So not just looking at equity.
'cause at the moment the reporting is quite blunt.
So what we could get from them, from them, uh,
from Health New Zealand was quite blunt in terms of here's
what the picture looks like if you cut up by ethnicity.
If you ask, well what does it look like if you combine
ethnicity with reality and socioeconomics?
We couldn't get that picture. Mm-hmm.
Um, so mean we wanted a more grand on a particular
understanding of equity,
how different factors affect equity.
That's what we're not seeing
Because as spoken, the example example of two, uh,
knee replacements, one with further complications, um,
the further complications is going to need more, more work.
But if we have the ability to do the easy one,
surely we get a better quality of life
by making sure that does.
'cause it's not an and or sit
situation, which I think is often.
Yeah. And I framing
And I think in a report we actually say, look, the,
the risks we talk about
and when we talk about outsourcing,
they're understood risks.
We heard a lot about those risks from the people we spoke to
and from the documents we read.
What we didn't see was a clear plan for monitoring
and managing those risks.
And so if you want to deliver both more timely care
and do that in an equitable way, recognizing
that not everybody can, uh, be outsourced
and people will be treated in the public system.
Okay, so what's the plan? What, how are you managing that?
How, how are you monitoring that in order to also, you know,
what is that legal requirement
And how big is the risk?
Which is quite a significant question they should be asking
because it should be low and high impact or low medium.
There is a way to risk manage,
but if we can't even see what the level of the risk is,
it suggests to me that it's not being
taken as seriously as it should
Be. I mean, it kind of goes
back to the
conversation that you were having earlier.
Right? The the point that we would make is
that under the current settings, they have to think about,
thinking about timeliness is obviously a good thing.
It's good thing for everybody.
They also need to think about equity.
They need to think about those two things together. Mm-hmm.
Right. We're on time.
Thank you very much for making yourselves
available to present to us today.
You're welcome. Thanks for the.